LINK DO ARTYKULU ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12918-018-0661-z
TYTUL ---> rPCMP: robust p -value combination by multiple partitions with applications to ATAC-seq data
AUTORZY ---> Cai, Menglan    Li, Limin    
ZAWARTOSC ABSTRACT ---> Background Evaluating the significance for a group of genes or proteins in a pathway or biological process for a disease could help researchers understand the mechanism of the disease. For example, identifying related pathways or gene functions for chromatin states of tumor-specific T cells will help determine whether T cells could reprogram or not, and further help design the cancer treatment strategy. Some existing p-value combination methods can be used in this scenario. However, these methods suffer from different disadvantages, and thus it is still challenging to design more powerful and robust statistical method. Results The existing method of Group combined p-value (GCP) first partitions p-values to several groups using a set of several truncation points, but the method is often sensitive to these truncation points. Another method of adaptive rank truncated product method(ARTP) makes use of multiple truncation integers to adaptively combine the smallest p-values, but the method loses statistical power since it ignores the larger p-values. To tackle these problems, we propose a robust p-value combination method (rPCMP) by considering multiple partitions of p-values with different sets of truncation points. The proposed rPCMP statistic have a three-layer hierarchical structure. The inner-layer considers a statistic which combines p-values in a specified interval defined by two thresholds points, the intermediate-layer uses a GCP statistic which optimizes the statistic from the inner layer for a partition set of threshold points, and the outer-layer integrates the GCP statistic from multiple partitions of p-values. The empirical distribution of statistic under null distribution could be estimated by permutation procedure. Conclusions Our proposed rPCMP method has been shown to be more robust and have higher statistical power. Simulation study shows that our method can effectively control the type I error rates and have higher statistical power than the existing methods. We finally apply our rPCMP method to an ATAC-seq dataset for discovering the related gene functions with chromatin states in mouse tumors T cell.


LINK DO ARTYKULU ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12918-018-0654-y
TYTUL ---> Multi-CSAR: a multiple reference-based contig scaffolder using algebraic rearrangements
AUTORZY ---> Chen, Kun-Tze    Shen, Hsin-Ting    Lu, Chin Lung    
ZAWARTOSC ABSTRACT ---> Background One of the important steps in the process of assembling a genome sequence from short reads is scaffolding, in which the contigs in a draft genome are ordered and oriented into scaffolds. Currently, several scaffolding tools based on a single reference genome have been developed. However, a single reference genome may not be sufficient alone for a scaffolder to generate correct scaffolds of a target draft genome, especially when the evolutionary relationship between the target and reference genomes is distant or some rearrangements occur between them. This motivates the need to develop scaffolding tools that can order and orient the contigs of the target genome using multiple reference genomes. Results In this work, we utilize a heuristic method to develop a new scaffolder called Multi-CSAR that is able to accurately scaffold a target draft genome based on multiple reference genomes, each of which does not need to be complete. Our experimental results on real datasets show that Multi-CSAR outperforms other two multiple reference-based scaffolding tools, Ragout and MeDuSa, in terms of many average metrics, such as sensitivity, precision, F-score, genome coverage, NGA50, scaffold number and running time. Conclusions Multi-CSAR is a multiple reference-based scaffolder that can efficiently produce more accurate scaffolds of a target draft genome by referring to multiple complete and/or incomplete genomes of related organisms. Its stand-alone program is available for download at https://github.com/ablab-nthu/Multi-CSAR.


LINK DO ARTYKULU ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12918-018-0662-y
TYTUL ---> Integrating node embeddings and biological annotations for genes to predict disease-gene associations
AUTORZY ---> Ata, Sezin Kircali    Ou-Yang, Le    Fang, Yuan    Kwoh, Chee-Keong    Wu, Min    Li, Xiao-Li    
ZAWARTOSC ABSTRACT ---> Background Predicting disease causative genes (or simply, disease genes) has played critical roles in understanding the genetic basis of human diseases and further providing disease treatment guidelines. While various computational methods have been proposed for disease gene prediction, with the recent increasing availability of biological information for genes, it is highly motivated to leverage these valuable data sources and extract useful information for accurately predicting disease genes. Results We present an integrative framework called N2VKO to predict disease genes. Firstly, we learn the node embeddings from protein-protein interaction (PPI) network for genes by adapting the well-known representation learning method node2vec. Secondly, we combine the learned node embeddings with various biological annotations as rich feature representation for genes, and subsequently build binary classification models for disease gene prediction. Finally, as the data for disease gene prediction is usually imbalanced (i.e. the number of the causative genes for a specific disease is much less than that of its non-causative genes), we further address this serious data imbalance issue by applying oversampling techniques for imbalance data correction to improve the prediction performance. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed N2VKO significantly outperforms four state-of-the-art methods for disease gene prediction across seven diseases. Conclusions In this study, we show that node embeddings learned from PPI networks work well for disease gene prediction, while integrating node embeddings with other biological annotations further improves the performance of classification models. Moreover, oversampling techniques for imbalance correction further enhances the prediction performance. In addition, the literature search of predicted disease genes also shows the effectiveness of our proposed N2VKO framework for disease gene prediction.


LINK DO ARTYKULU ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12918-018-0663-x
TYTUL ---> A unified solution for different scenarios of predicting drug-target interactions via triple matrix factorization
AUTORZY ---> Shi, Jian-Yu    Zhang, An-Qi    Zhang, Shao-Wu    Mao, Kui-Tao    Yiu, Siu-Ming    
ZAWARTOSC ABSTRACT ---> Background During the identification of potential candidates, computational prediction of drug-target interactions (DTIs) is important to subsequent expensive validation in wet-lab. DTI screening considers four scenarios, depending on whether the drug is an existing or a new drug and whether the target is an existing or a new target. However, existing approaches have the following limitations. First, only a few of them can address the most difficult scenario (i.e., predicting interactions between new drugs and new targets). More importantly, none of the existing approaches could provide the explicit information for understanding the mechanism of forming interactions, such as the drug-target feature pairs contributing to the interactions. Results In this paper, we propose a Triple Matrix Factorization-based model (TMF) to tackle these problems. Compared with former state-of-the-art predictive methods, TMF demonstrates its significant superiority by assessing the predictions on four benchmark datasets over four kinds of screening scenarios. Also, it exhibits its outperformance by validating predicted novel interactions. More importantly, by using PubChem fingerprints of chemical structures as drug features and occurring frequencies of amino acid trimer as protein features, TMF shows its ability to find out the features determining interactions, including dominant feature pairs, frequently occurring substructures, and conserved triplet of amino acids. Conclusions Our TMF provides a unified framework of DTI prediction for all the screening scenarios. It also presents a new insight for the underlying mechanism of DTIs by indicating dominant features, which play important roles in the forming of DTI.


LINK DO ARTYKULU ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12918-018-0657-8
LINK DO PDFA ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/track/pdf/10.1186/s12918-018-0657-8.pdf
TYTUL ---> Network-based logistic regression integration method for biomarker identification
AUTORZY ---> Zhang, Ke    Geng, Wei    Zhang, Shuqin    
ZAWARTOSC ABSTRACT ---> Background Many mathematical and statistical models and algorithms have been proposed to do biomarker identification in recent years. However, the biomarkers inferred from different datasets suffer a lack of reproducibilities due to the heterogeneity of the data generated from different platforms or laboratories. This motivates us to develop robust biomarker identification methods by integrating multiple datasets. Methods In this paper, we developed an integrative method for classification based on logistic regression. Different constant terms are set in the logistic regression model to measure the heterogeneity of the samples. By minimizing the differences of the constant terms within the same dataset, both the homogeneity within the same dataset and the heterogeneity in multiple datasets can be kept. The model is formulated as an optimization problem with a network penalty measuring the differences of the constant terms. The L1 penalty, elastic penalty and network related penalties are added to the objective function for the biomarker discovery purpose. Algorithms based on proximal Newton method are proposed to solve the optimization problem. Results We first applied the proposed method to the simulated datasets. Both the AUC of the prediction and the biomarker identification accuracy are improved. We then applied the method to two breast cancer gene expression datasets. By integrating both datasets, the prediction AUC is improved over directly merging the datasets and MetaLasso. And it’s comparable to the best AUC when doing biomarker identification in an individual dataset. The identified biomarkers using network related penalty for variables were further analyzed. Meaningful subnetworks enriched by breast cancer were identified. Conclusion A network-based integrative logistic regression model is proposed in the paper. It improves both the prediction and biomarker identification accuracy.


LINK DO ARTYKULU ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12918-018-0658-7
LINK DO PDFA ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/track/pdf/10.1186/s12918-018-0658-7.pdf
TYTUL ---> Computational drug repositioning using meta-path-based semantic network analysis
AUTORZY ---> Tian, Zhen    Teng, Zhixia    Cheng, Shuang    Guo, Maozu    
ZAWARTOSC ABSTRACT ---> Background Drug repositioning is a promising and efficient way to discover new indications for existing drugs, which holds the great potential for precision medicine in the post-genomic era. Many network-based approaches have been proposed for drug repositioning based on similarity networks, which integrate multiple sources of drugs and diseases. However, these methods may simply view nodes as the same-typed and neglect the semantic meanings of different meta-paths in the heterogeneous network. Therefore, it is urgent to develop a rational method to infer new indications for approved drugs. Results In this study, we proposed a novel methodology named HeteSim_DrugDisease (HSDD) for the prediction of drug repositioning. Firstly, we build the drug-drug similarity network and disease-disease similarity network by integrating the information of drugs and diseases. Secondly, a drug-disease heterogeneous network is constructed, which combines the drug similarity network, disease similarity network as well as the known drug-disease association network. Finally, HSDD predicts novel drug-disease associations based on the HeteSim scores of different meta-paths. The experimental results show that HSDD performs significantly better than the existing state-of-the-art approaches. HSDD achieves an AUC score of 0.8994 in the leave-one-out cross validation experiment. Moreover, case studies for selected drugs further illustrate the practical usefulness of HSDD. Conclusions HSDD can be an effective and feasible way to infer the associations between drugs and diseases using on meta-path-based semantic network analysis.


LINK DO ARTYKULU ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12918-018-0659-6
TYTUL ---> Optimizing gene set annotations combining GO structure and gene expression data
AUTORZY ---> Wang, Dong    Li, Jie    Liu, Rui    Wang, Yadong    
ZAWARTOSC ABSTRACT ---> Background With the rapid accumulation of genomic data, it has become a challenge issue to annotate and interpret these data. As a representative, Gene set enrichment analysis has been widely used to interpret large molecular datasets generated by biological experiments. The result of gene set enrichment analysis heavily relies on the quality and integrity of gene set annotations. Although several methods were developed to annotate gene sets, there is still a lack of high quality annotation methods. Here, we propose a novel method to improve the annotation accuracy through combining the GO structure and gene expression data. Results We propose a novel approach for optimizing gene set annotations to get more accurate annotation results. The proposed method filters the inconsistent annotations using GO structure information and probabilistic gene set clusters calculated by a range of cluster sizes over multiple bootstrap resampled datasets. The proposed method is employed to analyze p53 cell lines, colon cancer and breast cancer gene expression data. The experimental results show that the proposed method can filter a number of annotations unrelated to experimental data and increase gene set enrichment power and decrease the inconsistent of annotations. Conclusions A novel gene set annotation optimization approach is proposed to improve the quality of gene annotations. Experimental results indicate that the proposed method effectively improves gene set annotation quality based on the GO structure and gene expression data.


LINK DO ARTYKULU ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12918-018-0665-8
TYTUL ---> Hot spot prediction in protein-protein interactions by an ensemble system
AUTORZY ---> Liu, Quanya    Chen, Peng    Wang, Bing    Zhang, Jun    Li, Jinyan    
ZAWARTOSC ABSTRACT ---> Background Hot spot residues are functional sites in protein interaction interfaces. The identification of hot spot residues is time-consuming and laborious using experimental methods. In order to address the issue, many computational methods have been developed to predict hot spot residues. Moreover, most prediction methods are based on structural features, sequence characteristics, and/or other protein features. Results This paper proposed an ensemble learning method to predict hot spot residues that only uses sequence features and the relative accessible surface area of amino acid sequences. In this work, a novel feature selection technique was developed, an auto-correlation function combined with a sliding window technique was applied to obtain the characteristics of amino acid residues in protein sequence, and an ensemble classifier with SVM and KNN base classifiers was built to achieve the best classification performance. Conclusion The experimental results showed that our model yields the highest F1 score of 0.92 and an MCC value of 0.87 on ASEdb dataset. Compared with other machine learning methods, our model achieves a big improvement in hot spot prediction. Availability http://deeplearner.ahu.edu.cn/web/HotspotEL.htm .


LINK DO ARTYKULU ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12918-018-0656-9
TYTUL ---> Analysis of significant protein abundance from multiple reaction-monitoring data
AUTORZY ---> Jun, Jongsu    Gim, Jungsoo    Kim, Yongkang    Kim, Hyunsoo    Yu, Su Jong    Yeo, Injun    Park, Jiyoung    Yoo, Jeong-Ju    Cho, Young Youn    Lee, Dong Hyeon    Cho, Eun Ju    Lee, Jeong-Hoon    Kim, Yoon Jun    Lee, Seungyeoun    Yoon, Jung-Hwan    Kim, Youngsoo    Park, Taesung    
ZAWARTOSC ABSTRACT ---> Background Discovering reliable protein biomarkers is one of the most important issues in biomedical research. The ELISA is a traditional technique for accurate quantitation of well-known proteins. Recently, the multiple reaction-monitoring (MRM) mass spectrometry has been proposed for quantifying newly discovered protein and has become a popular alternative to ELISA. For the MRM data analysis, linear mixed modeling (LMM) has been used to analyze MRM data. MSstats is one of the most widely used tools for MRM data analysis that is based on the LMMs. However, LMMs often provide various significance results, depending on model specification. Sometimes it would be difficult to specify a correct LMM method for the analysis of MRM data. Here, we propose a new logistic regression-based method for Significance Analysis of Multiple Reaction Monitoring (LR-SAM). Results Through simulation studies, we demonstrate that LMM methods may not preserve type I error, thus yielding high false- positive errors, depending on how random effects are specified. Our simulation study also shows that the LR-SAM approach performs similarly well as LMM approaches, in most cases. However, LR-SAM performs better than the LMMs, particularly when the effects sizes of peptides from the same protein are heterogeneous. Our proposed method was applied to MRM data for identification of proteins associated with clinical responses of treatment of 115 hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients with the tyrosine kinase inhibitor sorafenib. Of 124 candidate proteins, LMM approaches provided 6 results varying in significance, while LR-SAM, by contrast, yielded 18 significant results that were quite reproducibly consistent. Conclusion As exemplified by an application to HCC data set, LR-SAM more effectively identified proteins associated with clinical responses of treatment than LMM did.


LINK DO ARTYKULU ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12918-018-0660-0
LINK DO PDFA ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/track/pdf/10.1186/s12918-018-0660-0.pdf
TYTUL ---> Laplacian normalization and bi-random walks on heterogeneous networks for predicting lncRNA-disease associations
AUTORZY ---> Wen, Yaping    Han, Guosheng    Anh, Vo V.    
ZAWARTOSC ABSTRACT ---> Background Evidences have increasingly indicated that lncRNAs (long non-coding RNAs) are deeply involved in important biological regulation processes leading to various human complex diseases. Experimental investigations of these disease associated lncRNAs are slow with high costs. Computational methods to infer potential associations between lncRNAs and diseases have become an effective prior-pinpointing approach to the experimental verification. Results In this study, we develop a novel method for the prediction of lncRNA-disease associations using bi-random walks on a network merging the similarities of lncRNAs and diseases. Particularly, this method applies a Laplacian technique to normalize the lncRNA similarity matrix and the disease similarity matrix before the construction of the lncRNA similarity network and disease similarity network. The two networks are then connected via existing lncRNA-disease associations. After that, bi-random walks are applied on the heterogeneous network to predict the potential associations between the lncRNAs and the diseases. Experimental results demonstrate that the performance of our method is highly comparable to or better than the state-of-the-art methods for predicting lncRNA-disease associations. Our analyses on three cancer data sets (breast cancer, lung cancer, and liver cancer) also indicate the usefulness of our method in practical applications. Conclusions Our proposed method, including the construction of the lncRNA similarity network and disease similarity network and the bi-random walks algorithm on the heterogeneous network, could be used for prediction of potential associations between the lncRNAs and the diseases.


LINK DO ARTYKULU ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12918-018-0664-9
TYTUL ---> FMSM: a novel computational model for predicting potential miRNA biomarkers for various human diseases
AUTORZY ---> Sun, Yiwen    Zhu, Zexuan    You, Zhu-Hong    Zeng, Zijie    Huang, Zhi-An    Huang, Yu-An    
ZAWARTOSC ABSTRACT ---> Background MicroRNA (miRNA) plays a key role in regulation mechanism of human biological processes, including the development of disease and disorder. It is necessary to identify potential miRNA biomarkers for various human diseases. Computational prediction model is expected to accelerate the process of identification. Results Considering the limitations of previously proposed models, we present a novel computational model called FMSM. It infers latent miRNA biomarkers involved in the mechanism of various diseases based on the known miRNA-disease association network, miRNA expression similarity, disease semantic similarity and Gaussian interaction profile kernel similarity. FMSM achieves reliable prediction performance in 5-fold and leave-one-out cross validations with area under ROC curve (AUC) values of 0.9629+/− 0.0127 and 0.9433, respectively, which outperforms the state-of-the-art competitors and classical algorithms. In addition, 19 of top 25 predicted miRNAs have been validated to have associations with Colonic Neoplasms in case study. Conclusions A factored miRNA similarity based model and miRNA expression similarity substantially contribute to the well-performing prediction. The list of the predicted most latent miRNA biomarkers of various human diseases is publicized. It is anticipated that FMSM could serve as a useful tool guiding the future experimental validation for those promising miRNA biomarker candidates.


LINK DO ARTYKULU ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12918-018-0655-x
TYTUL ---> Identification of active signaling pathways by integrating gene expression and protein interaction data
AUTORZY ---> Kabir, Md Humayun    Patrick, Ralph    Ho, Joshua W. K.    O’Connor, Michael D.    
ZAWARTOSC ABSTRACT ---> Background Signaling pathways are the key biological mechanisms that transduce extracellular signals to affect transcription factor mediated gene regulation within cells. A number of computational methods have been developed to identify the topological structure of a specific signaling pathway using protein-protein interaction data, but they are not designed for identifying active signaling pathways in an unbiased manner. On the other hand, there are statistical methods based on gene sets or pathway data that can prioritize likely active signaling pathways, but they do not make full use of active pathway structure that link receptor, kinases and downstream transcription factors. Results Here, we present a method to simultaneously predict the set of active signaling pathways, together with their pathway structure, by integrating protein-protein interaction network and gene expression data. We evaluated the capacity for our method to predict active signaling pathways for dental epithelial cells, ocular lens epithelial cells, human pluripotent stem cell-derived lens epithelial cells, and lens fiber cells. This analysis showed our approach could identify all the known active pathways that are associated with tooth formation and lens development. Conclusions The results suggest that SPAGI can be a useful approach to identify the potential active signaling pathways given a gene expression profile. Our method is implemented as an open source R package, available via https://github.com/VCCRI/SPAGI/ .


LINK DO ARTYKULU ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12918-018-0670-y
LINK DO PDFA ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/track/pdf/10.1186/s12918-018-0670-y.pdf
TYTUL ---> Parameter estimation of qualitative biological regulatory networks on high performance computing hardware
AUTORZY ---> Saeed, Muhammad Tariq    Ahmad, Jamil    Baumbach, Jan    Pauling, Josch    Shafi, Aamir    Paracha, Rehan Zafar    Hayat, Asad    Ali, Amjad    
ZAWARTOSC ABSTRACT ---> Background Biological Regulatory Networks (BRNs) are responsible for developmental and maintenance related functions in organisms. These functions are implemented by the dynamics of BRNs and are sensitive to regulations enforced by specific activators and inhibitors. The logical modeling formalism by René Thomas incorporates this sensitivity with a set of logical parameters modulated by available regulators, varying with time. With the increase in complexity of BRNs in terms of number of entities and their interactions, the task of parameters estimation becomes computationally expensive with existing sequential SMBioNET tool. We extend the existing sequential implementation of SMBioNET by using a data decomposition approach using a Java messaging library called MPJ Express. The approach divides the parameters space into different regions and each region is then explored in parallel on High Performance Computing (HPC) hardware. Results The performance of the parallel approach is evaluated on BRNs of different sizes, and experimental results on multicore and cluster computers showed almost linear speed-up. This parallel code can be executed on a wide range of concurrent hardware including laptops equipped with multicore processors, and specialized distributed memory computer systems. To demonstrate the application of parallel implementation, we selected a case study of Hexosamine Biosynthetic Pathway (HBP) in cancer progression to identify potential therapeutic targets against cancer. A set of logical parameters were computed for HBP model that directs the biological system to a state of recovery. Furthermore, the parameters also suggest a potential therapeutic intervention that restores homeostasis. Additionally, the performance of parallel application was also evaluated on a network (comprising of 23 entities) of Fibroblast Growth Factor Signalling in Drosophila melanogaster. Conclusions Qualitative modeling framework is widely used for investigating dynamics of biological regulatory networks. However, computation of model parameters in qualitative modeling is computationally intensive. In this work, we presented results of our Java based parallel implementation that provides almost linear speed-up on both multicore and cluster platforms. The parallel implementation is available at https://psmbionet.github.io .


LINK DO ARTYKULU ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12918-018-0668-5
TYTUL ---> Mechanistic insight into activation of MAPK signaling by pro-angiogenic factors
AUTORZY ---> Song, Min    Finley, Stacey D.    
ZAWARTOSC ABSTRACT ---> Background Angiogenesis is important in physiological and pathological conditions, as blood vessels provide nutrients and oxygen needed for tissue growth and survival. Therefore, targeting angiogenesis is a prominent strategy in both tissue engineering and cancer treatment. However, not all of the approaches to promote or inhibit angiogenesis lead to successful outcomes. Angiogenesis-based therapies primarily target pro-angiogenic factors such as vascular endothelial growth factor-A (VEGF) or fibroblast growth factor (FGF) in isolation. However, pre-clinical and clinical evidence shows these therapies often have limited effects. To improve therapeutic strategies, including targeting FGF and VEGF in combination, we need a quantitative understanding of the how the promoters combine to stimulate angiogenesis. Results In this study, we trained and validated a detailed mathematical model to quantitatively characterize the crosstalk of FGF and VEGF intracellular signaling. This signaling is initiated by FGF binding to the FGF receptor 1 (FGFR1) and heparan sulfate glycosaminoglycans (HSGAGs) or VEGF binding to VEGF receptor 2 (VEGFR2) to promote downstream signaling. The model focuses on FGF- and VEGF-induced mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling and phosphorylation of extracellular regulated kinase (ERK), which promotes cell proliferation. We apply the model to predict the dynamics of phosphorylated ERK (pERK) in response to the stimulation by FGF and VEGF individually and in combination. The model predicts that FGF and VEGF have differential effects on pERK. Additionally, since VEGFR2 upregulation has been observed in pathological conditions, we apply the model to investigate the effects of VEGFR2 density and trafficking parameters. The model predictions show that these parameters significantly influence the response to VEGF stimulation. Conclusions The model agrees with experimental data and is a framework to synthesize and quantitatively explain experimental studies. Ultimately, the model provides mechanistic insight into FGF and VEGF interactions needed to identify potential targets for pro- or anti-angiogenic therapies.


LINK DO ARTYKULU ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12918-018-0642-2
TYTUL ---> GSAE: an autoencoder with embedded gene-set nodes for genomics functional characterization
AUTORZY ---> Chen, Hung-I Harry    Chiu, Yu-Chiao    Zhang, Tinghe    Zhang, Songyao    Huang, Yufei    Chen, Yidong    
ZAWARTOSC ABSTRACT ---> Background Bioinformatics tools have been developed to interpret gene expression data at the gene set level, and these gene set based analyses improve the biologists’ capability to discover functional relevance of their experiment design. While elucidating gene set individually, inter-gene sets association is rarely taken into consideration. Deep learning, an emerging machine learning technique in computational biology, can be used to generate an unbiased combination of gene set, and to determine the biological relevance and analysis consistency of these combining gene sets by leveraging large genomic data sets. Results In this study, we proposed a gene superset autoencoder (GSAE), a multi-layer autoencoder model with the incorporation of a priori defined gene sets that retain the crucial biological features in the latent layer. We introduced the concept of the gene superset, an unbiased combination of gene sets with weights trained by the autoencoder, where each node in the latent layer is a superset. Trained with genomic data from TCGA and evaluated with their accompanying clinical parameters, we showed gene supersets’ ability of discriminating tumor subtypes and their prognostic capability. We further demonstrated the biological relevance of the top component gene sets in the significant supersets. Conclusions Using autoencoder model and gene superset at its latent layer, we demonstrated that gene supersets retain sufficient biological information with respect to tumor subtypes and clinical prognostic significance. Superset also provides high reproducibility on survival analysis and accurate prediction for cancer subtypes.


LINK DO ARTYKULU ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12918-018-0643-1
TYTUL ---> Multiple transcription factors contribute to inter-chromosomal interaction in yeast
AUTORZY ---> Dai, Yulin    Li, Chao    Pei, Guangsheng    Dong, Xiao    Ding, Guohui    Zhao, Zhongming    Li, Yixue    Jia, Peilin    
ZAWARTOSC ABSTRACT ---> Background Chromatin interactions medicated by genomic elements located throughout the genome play important roles in gene regulation and can be identified with the technologies such as high-throughput chromosome conformation capture (Hi-C), followed by next-generation sequencing. These techniques were wildly used to reveal the relative spatial disposition of chromatins in human, mouse and yeast. Unlike metazoan where CTCF plays major roles in mediating chromatin interactions, in yeast, the transcription factors (TFs) involved in this biological process are poorly known. Results Here, we presented two computational approaches to estimate the TFs enriched in the chromatin physical inter-chromosomal interactions in yeast. Through the Chi-square method, we found TFs whose binding data are differentially distributed in different interaction groups, including Cin5, Stp1 and Sut1, whose binding data are negatively correlated with the chromosome spatial distance. A multivariate linear regression model was employed to estimate the potential contribution of different transcription factors against the physical distance of chromosomes. Rlr1, Set12 and Dig1 were found to be top positively participated in these chromosomal interactions. Ste12 was highlighted to be involved in gene reposition. Overall, we found 10 TFs enriched from both computational approaches, potentially to be involved in inter-chromosomal interactions. Conclusions No transcription factor (TF) in our study was found to have a dominant impact on the inter-chromosomal interaction as CTCF did in human or other metazoan, suggesting species without CTCF might have different regulatory systems in mediating inter-chromosomal interactions. In summary, we presented a systematic examination of TFs involved in chromatin interaction in yeast and the results provide candidate TFs for future studies.


LINK DO ARTYKULU ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12918-018-0649-8
LINK DO PDFA ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/track/pdf/10.1186/s12918-018-0649-8.pdf
TYTUL ---> An experimental design framework for Markovian gene regulatory networks under stationary control policy
AUTORZY ---> Dehghannasiri, Roozbeh    Shahrokh Esfahani, Mohammad    Dougherty, Edward R.    
ZAWARTOSC ABSTRACT ---> Background A fundamental problem for translational genomics is to find optimal therapies based on gene regulatory intervention. Dynamic intervention involves a control policy that optimally reduces a cost function based on phenotype by externally altering the state of the network over time. When a gene regulatory network (GRN) model is fully known, the problem is addressed using classical dynamic programming based on the Markov chain associated with the network. When the network is uncertain, a Bayesian framework can be applied, where policy optimality is with respect to both the dynamical objective and the uncertainty, as characterized by a prior distribution. In the presence of uncertainty, it is of great practical interest to develop an experimental design strategy and thereby select experiments that optimally reduce a measure of uncertainty. Results In this paper, we employ mean objective cost of uncertainty (MOCU), which quantifies uncertainty based on the degree to which uncertainty degrades the operational objective, that being the cost owing to undesirable phenotypes. We assume that a number of conditional probabilities characterizing regulatory relationships among genes are unknown in the Markovian GRN. In sum, there is a prior distribution which can be updated to a posterior distribution by observing a regulatory trajectory, and an optimal control policy, known as an “intrinsically Bayesian robust” (IBR) policy. To obtain a better IBR policy, we select an experiment that minimizes the MOCU remaining after applying its output to the network. At this point, we can either stop and find the resulting IBR policy or proceed to determine more unknown conditional probabilities via regulatory observation and find the IBR policy from the resulting posterior distribution. For sequential experimental design this entire process is iterated. Owing to the computational complexity of experimental design, which requires computation of many potential IBR policies, we implement an approximate method utilizing mean first passage times (MFPTs) – but only in experimental design, the final policy being an IBR policy. Conclusions Comprehensive performance analysis based on extensive simulations on synthetic and real GRNs demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed method, including the accuracy and computational advantage of the approximate MFPT-based design.


LINK DO ARTYKULU ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12918-018-0645-z
LINK DO PDFA ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/track/pdf/10.1186/s12918-018-0645-z.pdf
TYTUL ---> Classifying mild traumatic brain injuries with functional network analysis
AUTORZY ---> San Lucas, F. Anthony    Redell, John    Pramod, Dash    Liu, Yin    
ZAWARTOSC ABSTRACT ---> Background Traumatic brain injury (TBI) represents a critical health problem of which timely diagnosis and treatment remain challenging. TBI is a result of an external force damaging brain tissue, accompanied by delayed pathogenic events which aggravate the injury. Molecular responses to different mild TBI subtypes have not been well characterized. TBI subtype classification is an important step towards the development and application of novel treatments. The computational systems biology approach is proved to be a promising tool in biomarker discovery for central nervous system injury. Results In this study, we have performed a network-based analysis on gene expression profiles to identify functional gene subnetworks. The gene expression profiles were obtained from two experimental models of injury in rats: the controlled cortical impact and the fluid percussion injury. Our method integrates protein interaction information with gene expression profiles to identify subnetworks of genes as biomarkers. We have demonstrated that the selected gene subnetworks are more accurate to classify the heterogeneous responses to different injury models, compared to conventional analysis using individual marker genes selected without network information. Conclusions The systems approach can lead to a better understanding of the underlying complexities of the molecular responses after TBI and the identified subnetworks will have important prognostic functions for patients who sustain mild TBIs.


LINK DO ARTYKULU ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12918-018-0646-y
TYTUL ---> Integrating proteomic and phosphoproteomic data for pathway analysis in breast cancer
AUTORZY ---> Ren, Jie    Wang, Bo    Li, Jing    
ZAWARTOSC ABSTRACT ---> Background As protein is the basic unit of cell function and biological pathway, shotgun proteomics, the large-scale analysis of proteins, is contributing greatly to our understanding of disease mechanisms. Proteomics study could detect the changes of both protein expression and modification. With the releases of large-scale cancer proteome studies, how to integrate acquired proteomic and phosphoproteomic data in more comprehensive pathway analysis becomes implemented, but remains challenging. Integrative pathway analysis at proteome level provides a systematic insight into the signaling network adaptations in the development of cancer. Results Here we integrated proteomic and phosphoproteomic data to perform pathway prioritization in breast cancer. We manually collected and curated breast cancer well-known related pathways from the literature as target pathways (TPs) or positive control in method evaluation. Three different strategies including Hypergeometric test based over-representation analysis, Kolmogorov-Smirnov (K-S) test based gene set analysis and topology-based pathway analysis, were applied and evaluated in integrating protein expression and phosphorylation. In comparison, we also assessed the ranking performance of the strategy using information of protein expression or protein phosphorylation individually. Target pathways were ranked more top with the data integration than using the information from proteomic or phosphoproteomic data individually. In the comparisons of pathway analysis strategies, topology-based method outperformed than the others. The subtypes of breast cancer, which consist of Luminal A, Luminal B, Basal and HER2-enriched, vary greatly in prognosis and require distinct treatment. Therefore we applied topology-based pathway analysis with integrating protein expression and phosphorylation profiles on four subtypes of breast cancer. The results showed that TPs were enriched in all subtypes but their ranks were significantly different among the subtypes. For instance, p53 pathway ranked top in the Basal-like breast cancer subtype, but not in HER2-enriched type. The rank of Focal adhesion pathway was more top in HER2- subtypes than in HER2+ subtypes. The results were consistent with some previous researches. Conclusions The results demonstrate that the network topology-based method is more powerful by integrating proteomic and phosphoproteomic in pathway analysis of proteomics study. This integrative strategy can also be used to rank the specific pathways for the disease subtypes.


LINK DO ARTYKULU ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12918-018-0647-x
TYTUL ---> Prediction of protein self-interactions using stacked long short-term memory from protein sequences information
AUTORZY ---> Wang, Yan-Bin    You, Zhu-Hong    Li, Xiao    Jiang, Tong-Hai    Cheng, Li    Chen, Zhan-Heng    
ZAWARTOSC ABSTRACT ---> Background Self-interacting Proteins (SIPs) plays a critical role in a series of life function in most living cells. Researches on SIPs are important part of molecular biology. Although numerous SIPs data be provided, traditional experimental methods are labor-intensive, time-consuming and costly and can only yield limited results in real-world needs. Hence,it’s urgent to develop an efficient computational SIPs prediction method to fill the gap. Deep learning technologies have proven to produce subversive performance improvements in many areas, but the effectiveness of deep learning methods for SIPs prediction has not been verified. Results We developed a deep learning model for predicting SIPs by constructing a Stacked Long Short-Term Memory (SLSTM) neural network that contains “dropout”. We extracted features from protein sequences using a novel feature extraction scheme that combined Zernike Moments (ZMs) with Position Specific Weight Matrix (PSWM). The capability of the proposed approach was assessed on S.erevisiae and Human SIPs datasets. The result indicates that the approach based on deep learning can effectively resist data skew and achieve good accuracies of 95.69 and 97.88%, respectively. To demonstrate the progressiveness of deep learning, we compared the results of the SLSTM-based method and the celebrated Support Vector Machine (SVM) method and several other well-known methods on the same datasets. Conclusion The results show that our method is overall superior to any of the other existing state-of-the-art techniques. As far as we know, this study first applies deep learning method to predict SIPs, and practical experimental results reveal its potential in SIPs identification.


LINK DO ARTYKULU ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12918-018-0651-1
TYTUL ---> Circular RNA expression profiles during the differentiation of mouse neural stem cells
AUTORZY ---> Yang, Qichang    Wu, Jing    Zhao, Jian    Xu, Tianyi    Zhao, Zhongming    Song, Xiaofeng    Han, Ping    
ZAWARTOSC ABSTRACT ---> Background Circular RNAs (circRNAs) have recently been found to be expressed in human brain tissue, and many lines ofevidence indicate that circRNAs play regulatory roles in neurodevelopment. Proliferation and differentiation of neural stem cells (NSCs) are critical parts during development of central nervous system (CNS).To date, there have been no reports ofcircRNA expression profiles during the differentiation of mouse NSCs. We hypothesizethat circRNAs mayregulate gene expression in the proliferation anddifferentiation of NSCs. Results In this study, we obtained NSCs from the wild-type C57BL/6 J mouse fetal cerebral cortex. We extracted total RNA from NSCs in different differentiation stagesand then performed RNA-seq. By analyzing the RNA-Seq data, we found 37circRNAs and 4182 mRNAs differentially expressedduringthe NSC differentiation. Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of thecognate linear genes of these circRNAsrevealed that some enriched GO terms were related to neural activity. Furthermore, we performed a co-expression network analysis of these differentially expressed circRNAs and mRNAs. The result suggested a stronger GO enrichmentin neural features for both the cognate linear genes of circRNAs and differentially expressed mRNAs. Conclusion We performed the first circRNA investigation during the differentiation of mouse NSCs. Wefound that12 circRNAs might have regulatory roles duringthe NSC differentiation, indicating that circRNAs might be modulated during NSC differentiation.Our network analysis suggested the possible complex circRNA-mRNA mechanisms during differentiation, and future experimental workis need to validate these possible mechanisms.


LINK DO ARTYKULU ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12918-018-0644-0
TYTUL ---> Metabolomics of mammalian brain reveals regional differences
AUTORZY ---> Choi, William T.    Tosun, Mehmet    Jeong, Hyun-Hwan    Karakas, Cemal    Semerci, Fatih    Liu, Zhandong    Maletić-Savatić, Mirjana    
ZAWARTOSC ABSTRACT ---> Background The mammalian brain is organized into regions with specific biological functions and properties. These regions have distinct transcriptomes, but little is known whether they may also differ in their metabolome. The metabolome, a collection of small molecules or metabolites, is at the intersection of the genetic background of a given cell or tissue and the environmental influences that affect it. Thus, the metabolome directly reflects information about the physiologic state of a biological system under a particular condition. The objective of this study was to investigate whether various brain regions have diverse metabolome profiles, similarly to their genetic diversity. The answer to this question would suggest that not only the genome but also the metabolome may contribute to the functional diversity of brain regions. Methods We investigated the metabolome of four regions of the mouse brain that have very distinct functions: frontal cortex, hippocampus, cerebellum, and olfactory bulb. We utilized gas- and liquid- chromatography mass spectrometry platforms and identified 215 metabolites. Results Principal component analysis, an unsupervised multivariate analysis, clustered each brain region based on its metabolome content, thus providing the unique metabolic profile of each region. A pathway-centric analysis indicated that olfactory bulb and cerebellum had most distinct metabolic profiles, while the cortical parenchyma and hippocampus were more similar in their metabolome content. Among the notable differences were distinct oxidative-anti-oxidative status and region-specific lipid profiles. Finally, a global metabolic connectivity analysis using the weighted correlation network analysis identified five hub metabolites that organized a unique metabolic network architecture within each examined brain region. These data indicate the diversity of global metabolome corresponding to specialized regional brain function and provide a new perspective on the underlying properties of brain regions. Conclusion In summary, we observed many differences in the metabolome among the various brain regions investigated. All four brain regions in our study had a unique metabolic signature, but the metabolites came from all categories and were not pathway-centric.


LINK DO ARTYKULU ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12918-018-0650-2
TYTUL ---> Identification of gene signatures from RNA-seq data using Pareto-optimal cluster algorithm
AUTORZY ---> Mallik, Saurav    Zhao, Zhongming    
ZAWARTOSC ABSTRACT ---> Background Gene signatures are important to represent the molecular changes in the disease genomes or the cells in specific conditions, and have been often used to separate samples into different groups for better research or clinical treatment. While many methods and applications have been available in literature, there still lack powerful ones that can take account of the complex data and detect the most informative signatures. Methods In this article, we present a new framework for identifying gene signatures using Pareto-optimal cluster size identification for RNA-seq data. We first performed pre-filtering steps and normalization, then utilized the empirical Bayes test in Limma package to identify the differentially expressed genes (DEGs). Next, we used a multi-objective optimization technique, “Multi-objective optimization for collecting cluster alternatives” (MOCCA in R package) on these DEGs to find Pareto-optimal cluster size, and then applied k-means clustering to the RNA-seq data based on the optimal cluster size. The best cluster was obtained through computing the average Spearman’s Correlation Score among all the genes in pair-wise manner belonging to the module. The best cluster is treated as the signature for the respective disease or cellular condition. Results We applied our framework to a cervical cancer RNA-seq dataset, which included 253 squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) samples and 22 adenocarcinoma (ADENO) samples. We identified a total of 582 DEGs by Limma analysis of SCC versus ADENO samples. Among them, 260 are up-regulated genes and 322 are down-regulated genes. Using MOCCA, we obtained seven Pareto-optimal clusters. The best cluster has a total of 35 DEGs consisting of all-upregulated genes. For validation, we ran PAMR (prediction analysis for microarrays) classifier on the selected best cluster, and assessed the classification performance. Our evaluation, measured by sensitivity, specificity, precision, and accuracy, showed high confidence. Conclusions Our framework identified a multi-objective based cluster that is treated as a signature that can classify the disease and control group of samples with higher classification performance (accuracy 0.935) for the corresponding disease. Our method is useful to find signature for any RNA-seq or microarray data.


LINK DO ARTYKULU ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12918-018-0648-9
TYTUL ---> The International Conference on Intelligent Biology and Medicine (ICIBM) 2018: systems biology on diverse data types
AUTORZY ---> Wang, Kai    Liu, Xiaoming    Guo, Yan    Wu, Zhijin    Zhi, Degui    Ruan, Jianhua    Zhao, Zhongming    
ZAWARTOSC ABSTRACT ---> Between June 10–12, 2018, the International Conference on Intelligent Biology and Medicine (ICIBM 2018) was held in Los Angeles, California, USA. The conference included 11 scientific sessions, four tutorials, one poster session, four keynote talks and four eminent scholar talks that covered a wide range of topics in 3D genome structure analysis and visualization, next generation sequencing analysis, computational drug discovery, medical informatics, cancer genomics and systems biology. Systems biology has been a main theme in ICIBM 2018, with exciting advances presented in many areas of systems biology, covering various different data types such as gene regulation, circular RNAs expression, single-cell RNA-Seq, inter-chromosomal interactions, metabolomics, proteomics and phosphoproteomics. Here, we describe ten high quality papers to be published in BMC Systems Biology.


LINK DO ARTYKULU ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12918-018-0652-0
LINK DO PDFA ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/track/pdf/10.1186/s12918-018-0652-0.pdf
TYTUL ---> scdNet: a computational tool for single-cell differential network analysis
AUTORZY ---> Chiu, Yu-Chiao    Hsiao, Tzu-Hung    Wang, Li-Ju    Chen, Yidong    Shao, Yu-Hsuan Joni    
ZAWARTOSC ABSTRACT ---> Background Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-Seq) is an emerging technology that has revolutionized the research of the tumor heterogeneity. However, the highly sparse data matrices generated by the technology have posed an obstacle to the analysis of differential gene regulatory networks. Results Addressing the challenges, this study presents, as far as we know, the first bioinformatics tool for scRNA-Seq-based differential network analysis (scdNet). The tool features a sample size adjustment of gene-gene correlation, comparison of inter-state correlations, and construction of differential networks. A simulation analysis demonstrated the power of scdNet in the analyses of sparse scRNA-Seq data matrices, with low requirement on the sample size, high computation efficiency, and tolerance of sequencing noises. Applying the tool to analyze two datasets of single circulating tumor cells (CTCs) of prostate cancer and early mouse embryos, our data demonstrated that differential gene regulation plays crucial roles in anti-androgen resistance and early embryonic development. Conclusions Overall, the tool is widely applicable to datasets generated by the emerging technology to bring biological insights into tumor heterogeneity and other studies. MATLAB implementation of scdNet is available at https://github.com/ChenLabGCCRI/scdNet .


LINK DO ARTYKULU ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12918-018-0667-6
TYTUL ---> Qualitative modelling of the interplay of inflammatory status and butyrate in the human gut: a hypotheses about robust bi-stability
AUTORZY ---> Neumann, Gunter    Wall, Rebecca    Rangel, Ignacio    Marques, Tatiana M.    Repsilber, Dirk    
ZAWARTOSC ABSTRACT ---> Background Gut microbiota interacts with the human gut in multiple ways. Microbiota composition is altered in inflamed gut conditions. Likewise, certain microbial fermentation products as well as the lipopolysaccharides of the outer membrane are examples of microbial products with opposing influences on gut epithelium inflammation status. This system of intricate interactions is known to play a core role in human gut inflammatory diseases. Here, we present and analyse a simplified model of bidirectional interaction between the microbiota and the host: in focus is butyrate as an example for a bacterial fermentation product with anti-inflammatory properties. Results We build a dynamical model based on an existing model of inflammatory regulation in gut epithelial cells. Our model introduces both butyrate as a bacterial product which counteracts inflammation, as well as bacterial LPS as a pro-inflammatory bacterial product. Moreover, we propose an extension of this model that also includes a feedback interaction towards bacterial composition. The analysis of these dynamical models shows robust bi-stability driven by butyrate concentrations in the gut. The extended model hints towards a further possible enforcement of the observed bi-stability via alteration of gut bacterial composition. A theoretical perspective on the stability of the described switch-like character is discussed. Conclusions Interpreting the results of this qualitative model allows formulating hypotheses about the switch-like character of inflammatory regulation in the gut epithelium, involving bacterial products as constitutive parts of the system. We also speculate about possible explanations for observed bimodal distributions in bacterial compositions in the human gut. The switch-like behaviour of the system proved to be mostly independent of parameter choices. Further implications of the qualitative character of our modeling approach for the robustness of the proposed hypotheses are discussed, as well as the pronounced role of butyrate compared to other inflammatory regulators, especially LPS, NF- κB and cytokines.


LINK DO ARTYKULU ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12918-018-0653-z
TYTUL ---> Reframing gene essentiality in terms of adaptive flexibility
AUTORZY ---> Guzmán, Gabriela I.    Olson, Connor A.    Hefner, Ying    Phaneuf, Patrick V.    Catoiu, Edward    Crepaldi, Lais B.    Micas, Lucas Goldschmidt    Palsson, Bernhard O.    Feist, Adam M.    
ZAWARTOSC ABSTRACT ---> Background Essentiality assays are important tools commonly utilized for the discovery of gene functions. Growth/no growth screens of single gene knockout strain collections are also often utilized to test the predictive power of genome-scale models. False positive predictions occur when computational analysis predicts a gene to be non-essential, however experimental screens deem the gene to be essential. One explanation for this inconsistency is that the model contains the wrong information, possibly an incorrectly annotated alternative pathway or isozyme reaction. Inconsistencies could also be attributed to experimental limitations, such as growth tests with arbitrary time cut-offs. The focus of this study was to resolve such inconsistencies to better understand isozyme activities and gene essentiality. Results In this study, we explored the definition of conditional essentiality from a phenotypic and genomic perspective. Gene-deletion strains associated with false positive predictions of gene essentiality on defined minimal medium for Escherichia coli were targeted for extended growth tests followed by population sequencing and transcriptome analysis. Of the twenty false positive strains available and confirmed from the Keio single gene knock-out collection, 11 strains were shown to grow with longer incubation periods making these actual true positives. These strains grew reproducibly with a diverse range of growth phenotypes. The lag phase observed for these strains ranged from less than one day to more than 7 days. It was found that 9 out of 11 of the false positive strains that grew acquired mutations in at least one replicate experiment and the types of mutations ranged from SNPs and small indels associated with regulatory or metabolic elements to large regions of genome duplication. Comparison of the detected adaptive mutations, modeling predictions of alternate pathways and isozymes, and transcriptome analysis of KO strains suggested agreement for the observed growth phenotype for 6 out of the 9 cases where mutations were observed. Conclusions Longer-term growth experiments followed by whole genome sequencing and transcriptome analysis can provide a better understanding of conditional gene essentiality and mechanisms of adaptation to such perturbations. Compensatory mutations are largely reproducible mechanisms and are in agreement with genome-scale modeling predictions to loss of function gene deletion events.


LINK DO ARTYKULU ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12918-018-0633-3
TYTUL ---> The emerging role of microRNA-4487/6845-3p in Alzheimer’s disease pathologies is induced by Aβ25–35 triggered in SH-SY5Y cell
AUTORZY ---> Hu, Ling    Zhang, Rong    Yuan, Qiong    Gao, Yinping    Yang, Mary Q.    Zhang, Chunxiang    Huang, Jiankun    Sun, Yufei    Yang, William    Yang, Jack Y.    Min, Zhen-li    Cheng, Jing    Deng, Youping    Hu, Xiamin    
ZAWARTOSC ABSTRACT ---> Background Accumulation of amyloid β-peptide (Aβ) is implicated in the pathogenesis and development of Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Neuron-enriched miRNA was aberrantly regulated and may be associated with the pathogenesis of AD. However, regarding whether miRNA is involved in the accumulation of Aβ in AD, the underlying molecule mechanism remains unclear. Therefore, we conduct a systematic identification of the promising role of miRNAs in Aβ deposition, and shed light on the molecular mechanism of target miRNAs underlying SH-SY5Y cells treated with Aβ-induced cytotoxicity. Results Statistical analyses of microarray data revealed that 155 significantly upregulated and 50 significantly downregulated miRNAs were found on the basis of log2 | Fold Change | ≥ 0.585 and P < 0.05 filter condition through 2588 kinds of mature miRNA probe examined. PCR results show that the expression change trend of the selected six miRNAs (miR-6845-3p, miR-4487, miR-4534, miR-3622-3p, miR-1233-3p, miR-6760-5p) was consistent with the results of the gene chip. Notably, Aβ25–35 downregulated hsa-miR-4487 and upregulated hsa-miR-6845-3p in SH-SY5Y cell lines associated with Aβ-mediated pathophysiology. Increase of hsa-miR-4487 could inhibit cells apoptosis, and diminution of hsa-miR-6845-3p could attenuate axon damage mediated by Aβ25–35 in SH-SY5Y. Conclusions Together, these findings suggest that dysregulation of hsa-miR-4487 and hsa-miR-6845-3p contributed to the pathogenesis of AD associated with Aβ25–35 mediated by triggering cell apoptosis and synaptic dysfunction. It might be beneficial to understand the pathogenesis and development of clinical diagnosis and treatment of AD. Further, our well-designed validation studies will test the miRNAs signature as a prognostication tool associated with clinical outcomes in AD.


LINK DO ARTYKULU ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12918-018-0634-2
TYTUL ---> Increased AURKA promotes cell proliferation and predicts poor prognosis in bladder cancer
AUTORZY ---> Guo, Mengjie    Lu, Sicheng    Huang, Hongming    Wang, Yaohui    Yang, Mary Q.    Yang, Ye    Fan, Zhimin    Jiang, Bin    Deng, Youping    
ZAWARTOSC ABSTRACT ---> Background Bladder cancer (BC) is the most common cancer of the urinary bladder and upper tract, in which the clinical management is limited. AURKA (aurora kinase A) has been identified as an oncogene in cancer development; however, its potential role and underlying mechanisms in the progression of BC remain unknown. Results In this study, we evaluated Aurora kinase A (AURKA) expression in patient samples by performing gene expression profiling, and found that AURKA expression levels were significantly higher in BC tissues than in normal tissues. Increased AURKA in BC was strongly associated with stage and grade. Moreover, BC patients with elevated AURKA achieved poor overall survival rates. The experiments in vitro comprehensively validated the critical role of AURKA in promoting BC cell proliferation using the methods of gene overexpression and gene silencing. Furthermore, we proved that AURKA inhibitor MLN8237 arrested BC cell growth and induced apoptosis. Conclusions These findings implicate AURKA acting as an effective biomarker for BC detection and prognosis, as well as therapeutic target.


LINK DO ARTYKULU ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12918-018-0637-z
TYTUL ---> Systems biology analysis reveals new insights into invasive lung cancer
AUTORZY ---> Li, Dan    Yang, William    Arthur, Carolyn    Liu, Jun S.    Cruz-Niera, Carolina    Yang, Mary Qu    
ZAWARTOSC ABSTRACT ---> Background Adenocarcinoma in situ (AIS) is a pre-invasive lesion in the lung and a subtype of lung adenocarcinoma. The patients with AIS can be cured by resecting the lesion completely. In contrast, the patients with invasive lung adenocarcinoma have very poor 5-year survival rate. AIS can develop into invasive lung adenocarcinoma. The investigation and comparison of AIS and invasive lung adenocarcinoma at the genomic level can deepen our understanding of the mechanisms underlying lung cancer development. Results In this study, we identified 61 lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) invasive-specific differentially expressed genes, including nine long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) based on RNA sequencing techniques (RNA-seq) data from normal, AIS, and invasive tissue samples. These genes displayed concordant differential expression (DE) patterns in the independent stage III LUAD tissues obtained from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) RNA-seq dataset. For individual invasive-specific genes, we constructed subnetworks using the Genetic Algorithm (GA) based on protein-protein interactions, protein-DNA interactions and lncRNA regulations. A total of 19 core subnetworks that consisted of invasive-specific genes and at least one putative lung cancer driver gene were identified by our study. Functional analysis of the core subnetworks revealed their enrichment in known pathways and biological progresses responsible for tumor growth and invasion, including the VEGF signaling pathway and the negative regulation of cell growth. Conclusions Our comparison analysis of invasive cases, normal and AIS uncovered critical genes that involved in the LUAD invasion progression. Furthermore, the GA-based network method revealed gene clusters that may function in the pathways contributing to tumor invasion. The interactions between differentially expressed genes and putative driver genes identified through the network analysis can offer new targets for preventing the cancer invasion and potentially increase the survival rate for cancer patients.


LINK DO ARTYKULU ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12918-018-0640-4
TYTUL ---> A hotspots analysis-relation discovery representation model for revealing diabetes mellitus and obesity
AUTORZY ---> He, Guannan    Liang, Yanchun    Chen, Yan    Yang, William    Liu, Jun S.    Yang, Mary Qu    Guan, Renchu    
ZAWARTOSC ABSTRACT ---> Background Nowadays, because of the huge economic burden on society causing by obesity and diabetes, they turn into the most serious public health challenges in the world. To reveal the close and complex relationships between diabetes, obesity and other diseases, search the effective treatment for them, a novel model named as representative latent Dirichlet allocation (RLDA) topic model is presented. Results RLDA was applied to a corpus of more than 337,000 literatures of diabetes and obesity which were published from 2007 to 2016. To unveil those meaningful relationships between diabetes mellitus, obesity and other diseases, we performed an explicit analysis on the output of our model with a series of visualization tools. Then, with the clinical reports which were not used in the training data to show the credibility of our discoveries, we find that a sufficient number of these records are matched directly. Our results illustrate that in the last 10 years, for obesity accompanying diseases, scientists and researchers mainly focus on 17 of them, such as asthma, gastric disease, heart disease and so on; for the study of diabetes mellitus, it features a more broad scope of 26 diseases, such as Alzheimer’s disease, heart disease and so forth; for both of them, there are 15 accompanying diseases, listed as following: adrenal disease, anxiety, cardiovascular disease, depression, heart disease, hepatitis, hypertension, hypothalamic disease, respiratory disease, myocardial infarction, OSAS, liver disease, lung disease, schizophrenia, tuberculosis. In addition, tumor necrosis factor, tumor, adolescent obesity or diabetes, inflammation, hypertension and cell are going be the hot topics related to diabetes mellitus and obesity in the next few years. Conclusions With the help of RLDA, the hotspots analysis-relation discovery results on diabetes and obesity were achieved. We extracted the significant relationships between them and other diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease, heart disease and tumor. It is believed that the new proposed representation learning algorithm can help biomedical researchers better focus their attention and optimize their research direction.


LINK DO ARTYKULU ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12918-018-0635-1
LINK DO PDFA ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/track/pdf/10.1186/s12918-018-0635-1.pdf
TYTUL ---> MICRAT: a novel algorithm for inferring gene regulatory networks using time series gene expression data
AUTORZY ---> Yang, Bei    Xu, Yaohui    Maxwell, Andrew    Koh, Wonryull    Gong, Ping    Zhang, Chaoyang    
ZAWARTOSC ABSTRACT ---> Background Reconstruction of gene regulatory networks (GRNs), also known as reverse engineering of GRNs, aims to infer the potential regulation relationships between genes. With the development of biotechnology, such as gene chip microarray and RNA-sequencing, the high-throughput data generated provide us with more opportunities to infer the gene-gene interaction relationships using gene expression data and hence understand the underlying mechanism of biological processes. Gene regulatory networks are known to exhibit a multiplicity of interaction mechanisms which include functional and non-functional, and linear and non-linear relationships. Meanwhile, the regulatory interactions between genes and gene products are not spontaneous since various processes involved in producing fully functional and measurable concentrations of transcriptional factors/proteins lead to a delay in gene regulation. Many different approaches for reconstructing GRNs have been proposed, but the existing GRN inference approaches such as probabilistic Boolean networks and dynamic Bayesian networks have various limitations and relatively low accuracy. Inferring GRNs from time series microarray data or RNA-sequencing data remains a very challenging inverse problem due to its nonlinearity, high dimensionality, sparse and noisy data, and significant computational cost, which motivates us to develop more effective inference methods. Results We developed a novel algorithm, MICRAT (Maximal Information coefficient with Conditional Relative Average entropy and Time-series mutual information), for inferring GRNs from time series gene expression data. Maximal information coefficient (MIC) is an effective measure of dependence for two-variable relationships. It captures a wide range of associations, both functional and non-functional, and thus has good performance on measuring the dependence between two genes. Our approach mainly includes two procedures. Firstly, it employs maximal information coefficient for constructing an undirected graph to represent the underlying relationships between genes. Secondly, it directs the edges in the undirected graph for inferring regulators and their targets. In this procedure, the conditional relative average entropies of each pair of nodes (or genes) are employed to indicate the directions of edges. Since the time delay might exist in the expression of regulators and target genes, time series mutual information is combined to cooperatively direct the edges for inferring the potential regulators and their targets. We evaluated the performance of MICRAT by applying it to synthetic datasets as well as real gene expression data and compare with other GRN inference methods. We inferred five 10-gene and five 100-gene networks from the DREAM4 challenge that were generated using the gene expression simulator GeneNetWeaver (GNW). MICRAT was also used to reconstruct GRNs on real gene expression data including part of the DNA-damaged response pathway (SOS DNA repair network) and experimental dataset in E. Coli. The results showed that MICRAT significantly improved the inference accuracy, compared to other inference methods, such as TDBN, etc. Conclusion In this work, a novel algorithm, MICRAT, for inferring GRNs from time series gene expression data was proposed by taking into account dependence and time delay of expressions of a regulator and its target genes. This approach employed maximal information coefficients for reconstructing an undirected graph to represent the underlying relationships between genes. The edges were directed by combining conditional relative average entropy with time course mutual information of pairs of genes. The proposed algorithm was evaluated on the benchmark GRNs provided by the DREAM4 challenge and part of the real SOS DNA repair network in E. Coli. The experimental study showed that our approach was comparable to other methods on 10-gene datasets and outperformed other methods on 100-gene datasets in GRN inference from time series datasets.


LINK DO ARTYKULU ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12918-018-0638-y
TYTUL ---> MISC: missing imputation for single-cell RNA sequencing data
AUTORZY ---> Yang, Mary Qu    Weissman, Sherman M.    Yang, William    Zhang, Jialing    Canaann, Allon    Guan, Renchu    
ZAWARTOSC ABSTRACT ---> Background Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) technology provides an effective way to study cell heterogeneity. However, due to the low capture efficiency and stochastic gene expression, scRNA-seq data often contains a high percentage of missing values. It has been showed that the missing rate can reach approximately 30% even after noise reduction. To accurately recover missing values in scRNA-seq data, we need to know where the missing data is; how much data is missing; and what are the values of these data. Methods To solve these three problems, we propose a novel model with a hybrid machine learning method, namely, missing imputation for single-cell RNA-seq (MISC). To solve the first problem, we transformed it to a binary classification problem on the RNA-seq expression matrix. Then, for the second problem, we searched for the intersection of the classification results, zero-inflated model and false negative model results. Finally, we used the regression model to recover the data in the missing elements. Results We compared the raw data without imputation, the mean-smooth neighbor cell trajectory, MISC on chronic myeloid leukemia data (CML), the primary somatosensory cortex and the hippocampal CA1 region of mouse brain cells. On the CML data, MISC discovered a trajectory branch from the CP-CML to the BC-CML, which provides direct evidence of evolution from CP to BC stem cells. On the mouse brain data, MISC clearly divides the pyramidal CA1 into different branches, and it is direct evidence of pyramidal CA1 in the subpopulations. In the meantime, with MISC, the oligodendrocyte cells became an independent group with an apparent boundary. Conclusions Our results showed that the MISC model improved the cell type classification and could be instrumental to study cellular heterogeneity. Overall, MISC is a robust missing data imputation model for single-cell RNA-seq data.


LINK DO ARTYKULU ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12918-018-0636-0
TYTUL ---> Comparative toxicogenomics of three insensitive munitions constituents 2,4-dinitroanisole, nitroguanidine and nitrotriazolone in the soil nematode Caenorhabditis elegans
AUTORZY ---> Gong, Ping    Donohue, Keri B.    Mayo, Anne M.    Wang, Yuping    Hong, Huixiao    Wilbanks, Mitchell S.    Barker, Natalie D.    Guan, Xin    Gust, Kurt A.    
ZAWARTOSC ABSTRACT ---> Background Ecotoxicological studies on the insensitive munitions formulation IMX-101 and its components 2,4-dinitroanisole (DNAN), nitroguanidine (NQ) and nitrotriazolone (NTO) in various organisms showed that DNAN was the main contributor to the overall toxicity of IMX-101 and suggested that the three compounds acted independently. These results motivated this toxicogenomics study to discern toxicological mechanisms for these compounds at the molecular level. Methods Here we used the soil nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, a well-characterized genomics model, as the test organism and a species-specific, transcriptome-wide 44 K-oligo probe microarray for gene expression analysis. In addition to the control treatment, C. elegans were exposed for 24 h to 6 concentrations of DNAN (1.95–62.5 ppm) or NQ (83–2667 ppm) or 5 concentrations of NTO (187–3000 ppm) with ten replicates per treatment. The nematodes were transferred to a clean environment after exposure. Reproduction endpoints (egg and larvae counts) were measured at three time points (i.e., 24-, 48- and 72-h). Gene expression profiling was performed immediately after 24-h exposure to each chemical at the lowest, medium and highest concentrations plus the control with four replicates per treatment. Results Statistical analyses indicated that chemical treatment did not significantly affect nematode reproduction but did induce 2175, 378, and 118 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in NQ-, DNAN-, and NTO-treated nematodes, respectively. Bioinformatic analysis indicated that the three compounds shared both DEGs and DEG-mapped Reactome pathways. Gene set enrichment analysis further demonstrated that DNAN and NTO significantly altered 12 and 6 KEGG pathways, separately, with three pathways in common. NTO mainly affected carbohydrate, amino acid and xenobiotics metabolism while DNAN disrupted protein processing, ABC transporters and several signal transduction pathways. NQ-induced DEGs were mapped to a wide variety of metabolism, cell cycle, immune system and extracellular matrix organization pathways. Conclusion Despite the absence of significant effects on apical reproduction endpoints, DNAN, NTO and NQ caused significant alterations in gene expression and pathways at 1.95 ppm, 187 ppm and 83 ppm, respectively. This study provided supporting evidence that the three chemicals may exert independent toxicity by acting on distinct molecular targets and pathways.


LINK DO ARTYKULU ---> https://bmcsystbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12918-018-0639-x
TYTUL ---> Co-expression of long non-coding RNAs and autism risk genes in the developing human brain
AUTORZY ---> Cogill, Steven B.    Srivastava, Anand K.    Yang, Mary Qu    Wang, Liangjiang    
ZAWARTOSC ABSTRACT ---> Background Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is the umbrella term for a group of neurodevelopmental disorders convergent on behavioral phenotypes. While many genes have been implicated in the disorder, the predominant focus of previous research has been on protein coding genes. This leaves a vast number of long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) not characterized for their role in the disorder although lncRNAs have been shown to play important roles in development and are highly represented in the brain. Studies have also shown lncRNAs to be differentially expressed in ASD affected brains. However, there has yet to be an enrichment analysis of the shared ontologies and pathways of known ASD genes and lncRNAs in normal brain development. Results In this study, we performed co-expression network analysis on the developing brain transcriptome to identify potential lncRNAs associated with ASD and possible annotations for functional role of lncRNAs in brain development. We found co-enrichment of lncRNA genes and ASD risk genes in two distinct groups of modules showing elevated prenatal and postnatal expression patterns, respectively. Further enrichment analysis of the module groups indicated that the early expression modules were comprised mainly of transcriptional regulators while the later expression modules were associated with synapse formation. Finally, lncRNAs were prioritized for their connectivity with the known ASD risk genes through analysis of an adjacency matrix. Collectively, the results imply early developmental repression of synaptic genes through lncRNAs and ASD transcriptional regulators. Conclusion Here we demonstrate the utility of mining the publically available brain gene expression data to further functionally annotate the role of lncRNAs in ASD. Our analysis indicates that lncRNAs potentially have a key role in ASD due to their convergence on shared pathways, and we identify lncRNAs of interest that may lead to further avenues of study.


